.\" Manpage for sgit.
.\" Contact the project maintainers to correct errors or typos.
.TH SGIT 1 "2026-06-11" "sgit 1.0.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sgit \- a lightweight, native command-line Git client powered by GitKit
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sgit
.RI [ global-options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sgit
is a lightweight, native command-line Git client written in Swift and powered
by GitKit. It implements core Git operations \(em from initializing
repositories and staging changes to cloning, fetching, and pushing over HTTPS,
SSH, and local transports.
.PP
Running
.B sgit
with no arguments prints the built-in help screen.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-activity
Show an animated activity spinner while the command runs. This flag is optional
and may be placed anywhere in the argument list. The spinner is drawn on
standard error and is shown only when running in an interactive terminal, so it
never interferes with piped or redirected output.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Start a working area
.TP
.BI "init [\-\-bare] [" path ]
Create an empty Git repository. With
.B \-\-bare
create a repository without a working tree.
.TP
.BI "clone " "url " [ path ]
Clone a repository over HTTPS, SSH, or from a local path.
.SS Work on changes
.TP
.B status
Show the working tree status. May also be invoked as
.BR st .
.TP
.BI "add " "path... " "| ."
Stage file contents for the next commit. Use
.BR . ", " \-A ", or " \-\-all
to stage all changes.
.TP
.BI "rm " path...
Unstage files from the index.
.TP
.BI "commit \-m " message
Record staged changes to the repository. The message may also be supplied with
.BR \-\-message .
.TP
.BI "reset [\-\-soft|\-\-mixed|\-\-hard] [" commit ]
Reset the current HEAD to the given state. Defaults to
.BR \-\-mixed
and to the current HEAD commit when no commit is given.
.TP
.BI "stash [" message ]
Stash away changes in the working directory.
.SS Examine history & state
.TP
.BI "log [\-n " count ]
Show commit logs. The count may also be given as
.BI \-\-max\-count " count"
or as a bare
.BI \- count
(defaults to 50).
.TP
.B "diff [\-\-staged]"
Show changes between commits or, with
.B \-\-staged
(or
.BR \-\-cached ),
between the index and the last commit.
.TP
.BI "tag [\-a \-m " msg "] [" name ]
List, create, or delete tags. Use
.BI \-a
(or
.BR \-\-annotate )
with
.BI \-m " msg"
to create an annotated tag, and
.BI "\-d " name
to delete a tag.
.SS Branching & merging
.TP
.BI "branch [" name ]
List or create branches. Use
.BI "\-d " name
to delete a branch and
.BI "\-m " "old new"
to rename one.
.TP
.BI "checkout " branch | commit
Switch branches or restore a commit (detached HEAD). May also be invoked as
.BR switch .
.TP
.BI "merge " branch
Join two development histories together.
.SS Collaborate
.TP
.B remote
List remotes. Use
.BI "remote add " "name url"
to add a remote and
.BI "remote remove " name
(or
.BR rm )
to remove one.
.TP
.BI "fetch [" remote | url ]
Download objects and refs from another repository.
.TP
.BI "pull [" remote | url ]
Fetch and fast-forward the current branch.
.TP
.BI "push [" remote | url "] [" branch ]
Update remote refs along with associated objects.
.SS Other
.TP
.BR help ", " \-\-help ", " \-h
Show the help screen.
.TP
.BR version ", " \-\-version ", " \-v
Show version information.
.SH TRANSPORTS & AUTHENTICATION
.B sgit
supports HTTPS, SSH (\fIssh://\fR or scp-like \fIuser@host:path\fR), and local
paths or \fIfile://\fR URLs.
.TP
.B HTTPS
Authentication uses the URL userinfo, or the
.BR GIT_USERNAME " / " GIT_PASSWORD
(or
.BR GIT_TOKEN )
environment variables.
.TP
.B SSH
Uses your SSH agent and keys.
.TP
.B Local
Filesystem paths or
.I file://
URLs.
.SH IDENTITY
Author identity is resolved in the following order:
.IP 1. 4
The
.BR GIT_AUTHOR_NAME " / " GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL
environment variables.
.IP 2. 4
.BR user.name " / " user.email
in the repository's
.IR .git/config .
.IP 3. 4
.BR user.name " / " user.email
in
.IR ~/.gitconfig .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set, disables ANSI color output.
.TP
.BR GIT_USERNAME ", " GIT_PASSWORD ", " GIT_TOKEN
HTTPS authentication credentials.
.TP
.BR GIT_AUTHOR_NAME ", " GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL
Override the committer identity.
.SH EXAMPLES
Initialize a repository and record an initial commit:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sgit init
sgit add .
sgit commit \-m "Initial commit"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Inspect history and work with branches:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sgit log \-n 5
sgit branch feature
sgit checkout feature
.fi
.RE
.PP
Clone a repository, showing a progress spinner:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sgit \-\-activity clone https://github.com/owner/repo.git
sgit \-\-activity clone git@github.com:owner/repo.git
sgit clone /path/to/local/repo.git
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B sgit
exits
.B 0
on success and
.B 1
if an error occurs.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1)
.SH CAVEATS
.B sgit
is experimental and under active development. No guarantees are made regarding
correctness, stability, or data integrity. Operate on backups or throwaway
copies, and do not rely on it for critical or irreplaceable data.
.SH LICENSE
Licensed under the MIT License.
